# Java 1 - 15

**Paradigms** - Different approaches to creating programs

**Imperative Paradigm** - written as a sequence of instructions that the processor must execute step by step, it processes the data sequentially.. It is focused on “how to achieve a goal”/"How to do this?”. It is divided into three broad categories: Procedural programming paradigm, Object-oriented programming, ****and the ****Parallel processing approach.

- Procedural programming paradigm **-** based upon the concept of procedure calls, in which statements are structured into procedures also known as subroutines or functions. They are a list of instructions to tell the computer what to do step by step; the computer takes input data and processes it sequentially, remembering each new change. It changes the original data.
- Object-oriented programming (OOP) **-** the program is written as a collection of classes, each class has instances called objects. A class is a set of data like fields, attributes, class members, and functions/methods describing behaviour.
- Parallel processing - shares or parallelises instructions across multiple processors: "divide and conquer". It helps reduce instruction execution time.

**Declarative Paradigm** - specify the problem and the expected result of its solution. Rather than providing step-by-step instructions, you tell the system what you need and it comes up with a solution. It focuses on the task and tries to get an expected result.

- Logic programming - heavily based on formal logic. Any program written in a logical programming language is a set of sentences in a logical form that express facts and rules about a certain problem area. The task here is to find the answer to the query based on facts and rules.
- Functional programming - the computation process is interpreted as the computation of the values of functions. That is, a function in which the input is an array that is not changed, and the output is a new array with new data.
- Database programming paradigm - based on working with data stored in a database and queries are made in a special language, e.g. SQL. Program statements are data-defined rather than a hard-coded series of steps.

---

Java is platform independent = it can be run on multiple platforms with no changes - Write Anywhere Run Once, can run on any system that has a JVM.

When Java code is compiled, it is converted into bytecode which is executed by the **Java Virtual Machine (JVM)**. At runtime, the JVM translates the bytecode into machine code. 

It has it’s own garbage collector that automatically cleans memory garbage from unused content during runtime.

It's primarily an imperative language based on the object-oriented programming: almost every part of a program is an object. Therefore, a program itself can be considered as a set of interacting objects.

### Literals

Representation of Boolean, numeric, character or string data.

**Integers** - natural numbers including 0 and negatives. Use underscores for big integers, e.g. 1_000_000.

**Characters** - can be a single digit, letter, whitespace or another symbol. Use single quotes, e.g. ‘9’ is a char, 9 is a int. 

**Strings** - a sequence of individual characters representing text information. Use double quotes, e.g. “s” is a string, ‘s’ is a char.

```java
int number = ... //show it has a value
```

### Basic Terminology

- **Program** – a sequence of instructions (statements) executed in a predictable manner. Sequential flow is the most common sequence of statements, in which statements are executed in the order that they are written – from top to bottom in a sequential manner;
- **Statement** – a single action (like print a text) terminated by semi-colon (`;`);
- **Block** – a group of zero, one or more statements enclosed by a pair of braces `{...}`;
- **Method** – a sequence of statements that represents a high-level operation (aka subprogram or procedure);
- **Syntax** – a set of rules that define how a program needs to be written in order to be valid; Java has its own specific syntax that we will learn;
- **Keyword** – a word that has a special meaning in the programming language (e.g.`public`, `class`). These words cannot be used as variable names for your own program;
- **Identifier or name** – a word that refers to something in a program (such as a variable or a function name);
- **Comment** – a textual explanation of what the code does. Java comments start with `//`.
- **Whitespace** – ****all characters that are not visible (space, tab, newline, etc.).

```java
public class Main {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        System.out.println("Hello, World!");
    }
}
```

**The public class** - the basic unit of a program. Every Java program must have at least one class. The definition of a class consists of the `class` keyword followed by the class name. A class can have any name, such as `App`, `Main`, or `Program`, but it must not start with a digit. A set of braces `{...}` encloses the body of a class.

**The main method** - to make the program runnable, we put a method named `main` inside a class. It is the entry point for a Java program, every Java program must have a `main` method as it is the first to be executed when the program runs.

Capitalization matters: if you name your first method like **Main**, **MAIN** or something else, the program cannot start. The element `String[] args` represents a sequence of arguments passed to the program from the outside world.

The body of the method consists of programming statements that determine what the program should do after starting. Our program prints the string "Hello, World!".

The special method `println` displays a string followed by a new line on the screen.

---

### Printing Data

`System.out.println()` or `System.out.print` - print data via standard output in Java

`println()` - displays the value that was passed in followed by a new line

`print` - displays the value that was passed in and places the cursor (the position where we display a value) after it.

### Types and Variables

**variable** - placeholder for storing a value of a particular type

Every variable has a name = “an identifier” which must be declared before you use it: `DataType variableName = initialisation;`

- `DataType`/Type: determines what operations can be performed on it and what values can be stored in it.
- `variableName`/identifier: unique name - cannot start with a digit, case matters.
- `=` : assignment operator
- `initialisation`: value/result of an expression assigned to the variable.

Examples: `String language = "java";` or `int numberOfApples = 5;`

Once declared, a variable can be accessed/modified using it’s name. It’s possible to assign a value of one variable to another, e.g. `int one = 1; int num = one;` . It’s value can be changed using the `=` operator, but you can only assign a value of the same type as the initial variable.

Can declare variables of the same type in a single statement: `String language = "java", version = "8 or newer";`. 

Can separate declaration and initialisation: `int age;` `age = 35;`

**var**: forces automatic type inference based on the type of assigned value - `var language = "Java";` `var version = 10;`

---

### Comments

`//` End-of-line comments

`/* … */` Multi-line or single line comments

`/** … */` Documentation comments - auto generate documentation about source code using the `javadoc` tool.

### Scanning Input

**standard input** - a stream of data going into a program. By default, it obtains data from the keyboard input but it's possible to redirect it from a file.

`Scanner` - allows program to read values from the standard input.  

```java
import java.util.Scanner;

public class Main {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        Scanner scanner = new Scanner(System.in);
				String name = scanner.next();
        System.out.println("Hello, " + name + "!");

        String word1 = scanner.next(); // "This"
        String line1 = scanner.nextLine(); // " is a simple" 
        String word2 = scanner.next(); // "multiline"
        String word3 = scanner.next(); // "input,"
        String line2 = scanner.nextLine(); // "" 
    }
}
/*This is a simple
multiline input,
that is being read*/
```

Create an object of `Scanner` to use it’s methods. The `System.in` indicates the program will read text that you type in - it is an object representing the standard input.

- if the input is a integer or a single word, read the data using the `next()` method - this will store input as a String.
- if the input is more than one word, use the `nextLine()` method - the next method will only read the first word, the `nextLine()` method includes all space characters.

Note: in Java whitespace includes the space character and mostly everything that looks empty when printed: a tab, the newline character, and other non-printing characters.

The more correct term to refer to a “word” is **token**: a piece of text surrounded by whitespace. 

- The `next()` method finds and returns the next token, reading until the next whitespace then skipping the whitespace.
- The `nextLine()` reads all data till the end of the current line and places the cursor at the beginning of a new line.

**Multi-line input** - take into account the position of the cursor and the reading methods behaviour.

### Java Coding Conventions

Oracle Code Conventions (alternatively Google Style Guide.)

1. Use 4 spaces as a unit of indentation
2. Curly braces - opening brace at end of line, closing brace at beginning of next line.
3. Avoid extra spaces - before `()`, in, side `()`, before `;` 
4. Keep length of line to a min limit - 80, 100, 120, 140.

### Naming Variables

Every variable has a name to uniquely identify it. 

Names are case-sensitive, can include Unicode letters, digits and 2 special characters (`$`, `_`), cannot start with a digit and must not be a keyword, no whitespace.

If a single word, should be lowercase; if multiple words, use `lowerCamelCase`; shouldn’t start with `$` or `_` ; choose a name that makes sense.

### Arithmetic Operations

**Binary operators**: take two values as operands - addition `+`, subtraction `-` , multiplication `*`, division `/` , remainder `%` .

- `/` returns the int part of the division of 2 integers, the fractional part is discarded - `8/3 = 2`
- `%` returns the modulus/remainder of the division of 2 numbers - `12%4 = 0` and `5%9 = 5`
- use `()` to specify order of execution

**Unary operators**: take a single value as the operand. The **unary plus** operator indicates a positive value and **unary minus** operator negates a value or an expression.

********************************Precedence level********************************: parentheses > unary plus/minus > multiplication, division, the remainder > addition, subtraction.

---

### Integer Types and Operations

Integer `int` and Long `long`

- use `_` to improve readability - `int million = 1_000_000;`
- if number ends with `L` or `l` then it’s a long.
- use `long` numbers only if it is really necessary (when you deal with numbers larger than two billion). In other situations, prefer `int` numbers.

The assignment operator `=` has several forms which combine it with an operation to avoid repeating the variable: `+=`, `*=`, `/=`, `%=`.

To read `int` from input  - `scanner.nextInt();`

To read `long` from input - `scanner.nextLong();`

---


### Boolean / Logical Operations

`boolean`- `false` or `true` , aka the logical type.

Operators:

- NOT: reverses Boolean value - denoted `!`
- AND: true if both operands true - denoted `&&`
- OR: true if at least one operand true - denoted `||`
- XOR (exclusive OR): true if Boolean operands have different values - denoted `^`

Precedence: `!` (NOT), `^` (XOR), `&&` (AND), `||` (OR).

Short circuit evaluation: reduction in computation time - `&&` (AND) and `||` (OR) do not evaluate the second operand if it isn’t necessary. 

- `false && ...` → false
- `true || ...`  → true

### Relational Operators

- `==` (equal to)
- `!=` (not equal to)
- `>` (greater than)
- `>=` (greater than or equal to)
- `<` (less than)
- `<=` (less than or equal to)

In Java, you cannot write **a ≤ b ≤ c** , you must use `a≤b && b ≤c`. Relational operators have a higher priority than logical operators.