# Java 35 - 37

### IDE

**Integrated Development Environment**

In general, the development environment includes:

1. A **text editor** - designed to work with text files interactively. It allows you to view the contents of text files and perform various actions like inserting, deleting, and copying text, contextual search, replacement, sorting strings, viewing character codes and converting encodings, printing. They often contain additional functionality, such as syntax highlighting.
2. A **translator (compiler and/or interpreter)** - translates a text written in a programming language into machine code and does this either immediately before starting the program (compilation) or line by line (interpretation).
3. **Build automation tools**, which get the code ready and put everything together.
4. A **Debugger***,* which looks for errors in the code and immediately reports them.

### Binary Numbers

The **binary numeral system** or **base-2 numeral system** is a way of writing numbers using only two digits, 0 and 1. Each digit is referred to as a **bit** (**bi**nary digi**t**).

In everyday life we use the **decimal** number system, e.g. we have 10 digits (0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9). For example, 4251 = 4⋅10^3+2⋅10^2+5⋅10^1+1⋅10^0

In the **binary** number system, we do exactly the same, except the base is 2, not 10. For example, 1011 = 1⋅2^3+0⋅2^2+1⋅2^1+1⋅2^0 = 8 + 0 + 2 + 1 = 11 (Eleven)

- zero padding - add **non-significant zeroes** to the left to work with binary numbers of a fixed length: 1 = 001 (triad), 11 = 0011 (tetrad), 10101= 00010101 (8-digit numbers).

Why? Computers use transistors which can represent 2 states, on & off. Computer memory is binary - either something is in a memory cell or not.

- usually group data in 8-digit binary numbers. This way of storing information is called the **********************binary code**********************. Example, ASCII code or RGB (Red, Green, Blue) stores 3 binary values (1 for each colour representing the saturation of the components - (11111111, 00000000, 00000000) = pure red.

********byte******** - 8 bits - 8 digit number - represent values from 0 to 255. 

### Hexadecimals

**HEX -** **Hexadecimal Number System** - uses numbers 0,1…9 and the first six Latin letters: A, B, C, D, E, F (corresponding to decimals 10,11…15), as **hexadecimal digits**

A group of 4 bits = 2*2*2*2 = 2^4 = 16 values. 

So we can split any binary binary into 4-digit binary numbers

For Example: 

convert 1110011001110001 to HEX:

1110011001110001 =  1110  0110  0111  0001 = E 6 7 1 

convert 101100 to HEX:

101100 = 10 1100 = 0010 1100 = 2 C

convert HEX BE to binary:

B E = 1011 1110 = 10111110

To convert from decimal to HEX: decimal → binary → HEX.

| Hexadecimal | Binary | Decimal |
| --- | --- | --- |
| 0 | 0000 | 0 |
| 1 | 0001 | 1 |
| 2 | 0010 | 2 |
| 3 | 0011 | 3 |
| 4 | 0100 | 4 |
| 5 | 0101 | 5 |
| 6 | 0110 | 6 |
| 7 | 0111 | 7 |
| 8 | 1000 | 8 |
| 9 | 1001 | 9 |
| A | 1010 | 10 |
| B | 1011 | 11 |
| C | 1100 | 12 |
| D | 1101 | 13 |
| E | 1110 | 14 |
| F | 1111 | 15 |

Use HEX:

- to store error codes
- to represent character codes, prefixed with `%`, in URLs - e.g. `https://www.google.com/search?q=%40` if you google the `@` symbol
- writing programs in low level languages/encodings - e.g. Unicode represents every symbol as a hexadecimal number or RGB encoding.

| 1 and 1=1 | 1 or 1=1 | 1 xor 1=0 |
| --- | --- | --- |
| 1 and 0=0 | 1 or 0=1 | 1 xor 0=1 |
| 0 and 0=0 | 0 or 0=0 | 0 xor 0=0 |

XOR - true when number of true inputs is odd