# Java 38 - 44

### Characters

`char` - represents letters (uppercase and lowercase), digits, and other symbols. Each character is a symbol enclosed in single quotes. It can represent all characters in all languages, some special and computer symbols.

It corresponds to the **Unicode** (UTF-16) format - a computer encoding methodology that assigns a unique number for every character.

- can be created using its hexadecimal code - e.g. `char ch = '\u0040';` and `char ch = 64;` represent '@' -  `64` corresponds to the U nicode hexadecimal code `'\u0040'`.
- minimum value `'\u0000'` and maximum value encoded as `'\uffff'`
- Any `char` variable may be considered as an unsigned integer value in the range from 0 to 65535.
- use `+` and `-` to get next and previous characters: `char ch = 'b';`  `ch += 1;` is c and `ch -= 2;` is a.
- can increment/decrement using `++` and `--`

****escape sequences**** - characters starting with `\`

`'\n'` = newline character; `'\t'` = tab character; `'\r'` = carriage return character; `'\\'` = backslash character itself; `'\''` = single quote mark; `'\"'` = double quote mark.

### String

A reference type consisting of characters. It is immutable (cannot change a char in a String); can get individual characters (using indexes)/extract substrings; non-primitive.

- create a string literal using `“ ”` : `String simpleString = "It is a simple string";`
- can have 0≤ characters.
- can be null - no value assigned: `String nullString = null;`
- can use `new` keyword: `String str = new String("my-string");` it creates an object and assigns it to the variable

Useful Methods:

- `.length()` : returns number of chars in a String
- `charAt(int index)`: returns char at index.
- `isEmpty()`: returns `true` if the string is empty, otherwise – `false`;
- `toUpperCase()`: returns a new string in uppercase;
- `toLowerCase()`: returns a new string in lowercase;
- `startsWith(prefix)` returns `true` if the string starts with the given string prefix, otherwise, `false`;
- `endsWith(suffix)` returns `true` if the string ends with the given string suffix, otherwise, `false`.
- `contains(...)` returns `true` if the string contains the given string or character;
- `substring(beginIndex, endIndex)` returns a substring of the string in the range: `beginIndex`, `endIndex - 1`;
- `replace(old, new)` returns a new string obtained by replacing all occurrences of `old` with `new` that can be chars or strings.
- `trim()` returns a copy of the string obtained by omitting the leading and trailing whitespace. Note that whitespace includes not only the space character, but mostly everything that looks empty: tab, carriage return, newline character, etc.
- concatenating: can use + operator of `concat` method - `firstName + " " + lastName` = `firstName.concat(" ").concat(lastName)` - a new string is created as strings are **immutable**. In general, `str1 + str2` is not the same as `str2 + str1` because concatenation is not a commutative operation.
- `string1.equals(string2)` : Since String is a reference type we cannot use `==` or `!=` - using these will compare memory addresses not actual values. We use `.equals` instead.
- `string1.equalsIgnoreCase(string2)` - ignores different cases between strings.

It’s possible to add different types to a string, it’ll be automatically converted to a string - `String str = "str" + 10 + false;` = `"str10false"`. We go from left to right - the order of operations is important. `String shortString = "str";` `int number = 100;` -  `shortString + number + 50` = `"str10050"` whilst `number + 50 + shortString;` = `150str`

Exceptions:

- `NullPointerException` thrown if a string is `null` and you call a method of the string
- `StringIndexOutOfBoundsException` thrown if you try to access a non-existing character by an index.

### Final Variables

******************constants****************** - variables that should not be modified.

****************************final variable**************************** - used to define constants - cannot be modified once assigned, written in ALL_CAPS with a _ between words

- compiler will error if you try to modify the value of a final variable
- if a final variable has not been assigned before use, the compiler also will produce an error `"variable might not have been initialized"`.
- the value of a final variable can be reassigned to a regular variable - `final int count = 10;` `int cnt = count;` `cnt = 20;`
- can be used with reference variables - `final StringBuilder builder = new StringBuilder();` `builder = new StringBuilder(); // error line` `builder.append("Hello!"); // it works`

**************************StringBuilder************************** - `.append()` converts its argument to a `String` and then appends its characters to the character sequence.

The `StringBuilder` class represents a string that can be modified.

The final keyword makes a constant reference, but does not prohibit changing the internal state of the object.

Why? Allows you to write programs with the minimum number of mutable variables which usually leads to fewer errors. The Java compiler can optimize code with final variables effectively and your program can be a little faster. BUT massive use of the `final` keyword makes your code less readable

### Write Compile Run

**********write********** - write source code then save files with extension of the programming language it’s written in

******************compiler****************** - (javac tool for Java) translates source code into Java bytecode and stores it in .class files. The JVM executes it.

******run****** - the JVM represents a virtual computer. It executes the compiled bytecode and translates it into low level commands the computer understands. The code input into the JVM is platform-independent, while the output code is platform-dependent.

**platform independence** or portability - "write once, run anywhere” = a program can run on various devices as long as they have a JVM installed.

dev→ `.java` source code → compiler → `.class` bytecode → JVM → Low-level code → computer

JVM only understands Java bytecode, so if any language can generate bytecode, then it can also use the JVM - Kotlin, Scala, Groovy, Clojure etc.

### Errors

**Compile-time errors** - errors that prevent a Java program from being compiled, e.g. syntax error (wrong keyword/forgotten `;`), bad filename, non-existing method.

**Run-time errors** - aka bugs - errors that occur when program is running, causing unexpected behaviour/stop execution.

- **logic errors** – when a program produces a wrong result because the code is not correct
- **unhandled exceptional events** like division by zero, not found files etc.

### Exceptions

Errors detected during program execution (at runtime) - it interrupts the normal execution of a program. It does not prevent a program from being compiled and run, but the program crashes as soon as the line with an exception is being executed = all the code **before** the exception is executed properly, and everything **after** is not.

****************************************Arithmetic Exception**************************************** - `Exception in thread "main" java.lang.ArithmeticException: / by zero`

**Number Format Exception** - when trying convert a string into an integer number, if the string has an unsuitable format, the code will throw an exception. 

Example: using `Integer.parseInt(input);` with input = "121a”. To avoid this, it is possible to check the input string by using a regular expression. In case the input is not correct, we can output a warning message. `if (input.matches("\\d+")) {...}` `checks if the input line contains only digits`

### Null Pointer Exception NPE

Occurs when a program attempts to use a variable with the `null` value. `null` - used to indicate no actual value is assigned to a reference variable. To avoid an **NPE**, the programmer must ensure that the objects are initialized before their use.

- for reference types, use a conditional statement to check whether the given variable is `null` before using it;
- try to avoid assigning `null` to variables whenever possible;
- use NPE-safe features from the standard library.

Examples:

- Since String is a reference type, its value can be null. If we invoke a method or apply an operation to such a variable, the code throws an **NPE**.
    
    ```java
    String someString = null; // a reference type can be null
    int size = someString.length(); // NullPointerException (NPE)
    int size = someString != null ? someString.length() : 0; // if the string is null, the size is 0
    ```
    
- Comparing a String variable with a string literal. Use Yoda notation and call the equals method on the literal rather than the object:
    
    ```java
    String str = null;
    if (str.equals("abc")) {} // it throws an NPE
    if ("abc".equals(str)) {} // no NPE here
    ```
    
- Comparing 2 String variables. Use Objects class.
    
    ```java
    String s1 = null;
    String s2 = null;
    if (Objects.equals(s1, s2)) {} // no NPE here
    ```