# Java 45 - 55

### Introduction to Java - IDE / JVM, JRE & JDK /

**IDE** = Integrated Development Environment

******JVM****** = Java Virtual Machine - a virtual simulation of a physical computer, executes the Java (or Java-compatible) bytecode after the source code compilation.

******JRE****** = Java Runtime Environment - an execution environment includes the JVM itself and the Java Class Library (JCL) - combines the program bytecode with necessary libraries and runs the JVM, which executes the resulting bytecode.

******JCL****** = Java Class Library - a set of standard libraries providing the most common functionality: fundamental classes, input/output, math package, collections, security, user interface toolkits etc.

******JDK****** = Java Development Kit - a package to develop programs for the Java Platform, includes JRE to run the programs and tools for developers: Java compiler, debugger, archiver, documentation generator, etc. 

At the compilation stage, compilers translate source code into `.class` files that contain bytecode and can be executed by JVM. 

Programs often consist of multiple `.class` files packed together with an archiver tool into a single Java Archive (JAR file). JRE can run the program packed into a JAR directly without extracting the archived files. The resulting file is more convenient to store and share over the network since the data is compressed.


## ****************Introduction to OOP****************

******OOP****** = Object-oriented Programming - paradigm based on the concept of objects that interact to perform program functions - consists of a set of interacting objects. Each object is characterised by state and behaviour - state is represented by fields and behaviour is represented by methods.

### Four Basic Principles / Pillars

- ************Encapsulation************ - ensures grouping of data and the methods operating on that data into a single unit - a class groups (encapsulates) together related attributes, i.e. the trainee class only contains attributes related to trainee. It controls access to its attributes (variables that belongs to the class) and control values which can be given to its attributes - about hiding the internal data of objects from the world.
- **********************Abstraction********************** - objects should provide a simplified, abstract version of their implementations. Knowing the method name, argument types and return types is sufficient to use it; the complexity of behaviour is hidden - methods code doesn’t need to be known.
- **Inheritance** - a mechanism for defining parent-child relationships between classes; allows reuse of common logic and at the same time introduce unique concepts into the classes. One class (the child) acquires the attributes and behaviour of another class (the parent).
- **Polymorphism** = "having many forms” - allows programmers to define different implementations for the same method - there can be many forms of the same method. Thus, the name (or interface) remains the same, but the actions performed may differ. It is convenient to write an abstract class with general information to avoid copying every time and store what is different in the appropriate derived classes. We can overload (runtime polymorphism) or override (compile time polymorphism).
    
    ******************override****************** - create method in parent class and create a different version in the child class - must have same name, same number & type of arguments, code is replaced.
    
    ****************overload**************** - multiple methods with the same name but different arguments within same class, each with different functionality, version called depends on argument input.
    

Object - an individual **instance** of a class.

Class - a blueprint/template used to create objects. It defines their attributes/fields and behaviours/methods. Many objects can be created from a single class.

With the encapsulation principle - any user of the class should only see and use the interface part of the class, i.e. the list of declared properties and methods - the internal implementation of the object is not accessible to the user.

Examples

- A building class: each building has the same attributes (number of floors `int`, area `float`, year of construction `int`) with different values.
- A plane class: attributes = `String` name, `int` capacity, `int` speed, `float` coordinates; behaviour = transfer passengers from one geographical point to another. This changes the state of a plane, namely, its current coordinates.

Everything in OOP is an object (a class is a more abstract concept than an individual object). Programs are made up of different objects that interact with each other- object state and behaviour are usually combined. Sometimes we see objects without a state or methods. For example, there is such a thing as an interface - a class that only serves to be inherited from in order to guarantee an interface to its descendant classes. It is a stateless class.

### Defining Classes

Declare a new class with the `class` keyword followed by the class name: `class nameOfClass { ... // empty body}`. A class body can include fields, methods, and constructors. 

Fields store data, methods define behaviour and constructors allow us to create and initialize new objects of the class.

**********Field********** - a variable that stores data - can have any type, even of the same class. A class can have as many fields as you want.

```java
/** * The class is a "blueprint" for patients */
class Patient {
    String name;
    int age;
    float height;
}
```

All objects of the class `Patient` have the same fields, but their values may be different for each object. When you create a new object, each field is initialized with the default value of the corresponding type - String = null, Integer = 0.

Create an instance of the class using `new` : `Patient patient = new Patient();`

NOTE: if placing 2 or more classes in the same `.java` file, only one can be public and the name of the file must match the public class.

### Instance Methods

Methods describe what an object does. All methods can be divided into 2 groups:  instance or static. 

************static************ - an attribute/method belongs to the class itself rather than individual instances - can only call static methods & data. To invoke a static method, we don’t need to create a object, just call it with the class name. associated with the class as a whole;

****************instance**************** - requires a different invocation, to invoke an instance method we have to create an object first. can access the fields of the class with `this` keyword.

It's called an instance method because an instance is a concrete representation of an object.

```java
class Human {
    String name;
    int age;

    public static void printStatic() { System.out.println("It's a static method"); }
    public void printInstance() { System.out.println("It's an instance method"); } //no static keyword means this is an instance method
}

public static void main(String[] args) {
    Human.printStatic(); // will print "It's a static method"

		Human peter =  new Human();
    peter.printInstance(); // will print "It's an instance method"
    Human alice =  new Human();
    alice.printInstance(); // will print "It's an instance method"
}
```

Instance methods can access fields of a particular object.

```java
class Human {
    String name;
    int age;

    public static void averageWorking() { System.out.println("An average human works 40 hours per week."); } //static method
    public void work() { System.out.println(this.name + " loves working!");  } //instance method
    public void workTogetherWith(Human other) { System.out.println(this.name + " loves working with " + other.name + '!');  } //instance method
}
```

`this` keyword represents a particular instance of the class.

```java
public static void main(String[] args) {
    Human.averageWorking(); // "An average human works 40 hours per week."    
		Human peter =  new Human();
    peter.name = "Peter";
    peter.work(); // "Peter loves working!"
    Human alice =  new Human();
    alice.name = "Alice";
    alice.work(); // "Alice loves working!"    
		peter.workTogetherWith(alice); // "Peter loves working with Alice!"}
```

### Constructors

Special methods that initialize a new object of the class. A constructor of a class is invoked when an instance is created using the keyword `new`.

- it has the same name as the class that contains it;
- it has no return type (not even `void`);
- the default takes no arguments - all fields will be filled with the default values of their types.

```java
class Patient {

    String name;
    int age;
    float height;

    public Patient(String name, int age, float height) {
        this.name = name;
        this.age = age;
        this.height = height;
    }
}
Patient patient1 = new Patient("Heinrich", 40, 182.0f);
Patient patient2 = new Patient("Mary", 33, 171.5f);
```

- Use `this` keyword to initialise fields, which is a reference to the current object.
- If you define a specific constructor, the default constructor will not be created.
- Can also define a constructor without any arguments, but use it to set default values for fields of a class - useful in cases when any default value is better than `null`

---

### Package

Allow you to group related classes together in the same module (or package); avoid conflicting class names; and control access to classes and members with access modifiers.

Remember to give your class a package otherwise you cannot import it.

- Source Root Directory - `src` : top of the tree. Packages come below `src` and names are always lowercase.
- print full name using `System.out.println(classname.class.getName());`
- classes declared inside a package have a special keyword `package` at the top of the file.
- recommended to start your package hierarchy with the reversed domain name of your company: `org.hyperskill` `com.fdmgroup`

If classes are in different packages, you need an import statement to use one class inside the other - defined by the keyword ****`import`. To import all classes from a package, write `*` in the import statement instead of a particular class name. If two classes belong to the same package, you don't need to import them to each other.

Import Static members (methods/fields) - use a `*` in the import: `import static java.util.Arrays.*;` to use `sort(num);` instead of writing `Arrays.sort(num)` and `int[] copy = copyOf(num, num.length);` instead of writing `Arrays.copyOf(...)`

### Access Modifiers

An **access modifier** is a special keyword that specifies who is allowed to use your code. It can be placed in front of any field, method or the entire class.

**WHY?**

- Code clarity - control access as users have no need to know what is going on inside.
- Code safety - protect code so it is used as an unmodifiable part and it’s behaviour remains what was intended.

**Classes**

`public` - visible to all classes everywhere

`package-private = default` (no explicit modifier) - visible to only classes in the same package

Top-level fields/methods = used explicitly outside of the class.

Low-level fields/methods = used inside the class - help to decompose/order the structure of top level classes/methods/fields

The common way of using top-level class modifiers is:

- make the classes containing methods for users `public`;
- make all other classes with low-level logic methods used by public ones `package-private` (cover the engine with the body).

Remember: everything that’s not meant to be used/changed by classes from other packages should not be public.

**Members**

`private` - used to control access to fields, and hide internal low-level implementation from the rest of the code.

Usually these fields are only used internally and there’s no way to change/access them from another class.

Can use Getters/Setters methods to protect/hide data in classes, and returns the field value or sets/updates the value.

`package-private` (no keyword) - if a field/method/constructor has this modifier, then it can be changed from any class inside the same package.

Example: 

```java
public class Salary {
    long income;

    Salary(long income) {
        this.income = income;
    }
}

public class Promotion {
    Salary salary;

    Promotion(Salary salary) {
        this.salary = salary;
    }

    public void promote() {
        salary.income += 1500;
    }
}
```

`protected` - can be accessed from classes in the same package and all subclasses of this class (including ones in other packages) - less restricting that package-private

`public` - no restriction on using a field/method/class, often used for constructors and methods representing the class API, not so much used with fields.

---

Summary

- `private` - available only inside a class
- `package-private` (default, implicit, no modified defined) - available for all classes in same package
- `protected` - available for all classes in same package and all subclasses
- `public` - available for all classes everywhere

### Getters and Setters

Recall - data encapsulation - fields should not be directly accessed from other classes, can be accessed only through methods.

Getters can only read fields, and setters can only write (modify) the fields. Both types of methods should be `public` with fields made `private`

- **getters** start with **get**, followed by the variable name, with the first letter of the variable name capitalised except for a Boolean it starts with **is**, followed by the variable name.;
- **setters** start with **set**, followed by the variable name, with the first letter of the variable name capitalised.

### Inheritance

The act of deriving a new (child) class from another class (parent). Allows creation of class hierarchies and reusable code. use the keyword `extends`

“**superclass**” - the class from which the subclass is derived from (parent/base) - use `protected` to use fields/methods in all subclasses.

“**subclass**” - a class derived from another class is called a subclass (extended/child) - inherits all the public and protected data, and can add new fields/methods. Does not inherit private data unless used through public/protected methods. Constructors are not inherited but superclass constructor can be invoked using `super`. 

Is-A relationship: Whenever one class inherits another class, it is called an IS-A relationship. 

Has-A relationship: Whenever an instance of one class is used in another class, it is called HAS-A relationship

- Java doesn’t support multiple inheritance - can only inherit from one superclass - can use interfaces to implement multiple methods
- class hierarchy can have multiple levels - class C can extend class B that extends class A
- a super class can have more than one subclass

`final` - if a class is declared using final, it cannot have any subclasses. Some standard classes are final - `Integer`, `Long`, `String`, `Math`.

### Protected Modifier

- `private`: available only for the class itself;
- `default`: available for classes from the same package (= **package-private**);
- `protected`: available for classes from the same package and the extending classes.
- `public`: available from everywhere;

Use the most restrictive access level that makes sense for a particular member - it’s better to first make it private and expand its availability later if needed.

`java.math.BigInteger(…);` special class used to operate on large numbers