# Java 65 - 72

### Polymorphism

polymorphism - something that has many forms

In Java, there are 2 types: static (compile time) = method overloading, and dynamic (run time) = inheritance/method overriding. 

copy/pasted 

- **Ad-hoc polymorphism** refers to polymorphic functions that can be applied to arguments of different types, but behave differently depending on the type of the argument to which they are applied. Java supports it as **method overloading**.
- **Subtype polymorphism** (also known as subtyping) is a possibility to use an instance of a subclass when an instance of the base class is permitted.
- **Parametric polymorphism** is when the code is written without mention of any specific type and thus can be used transparently with any number of new types. Java supports it as **generics** or **generic programming**.

Recall: *method overriding* is when a subclass redefines a method of the superclass with the same signature.

**Run-time polymorphism** works when an overridden method is called through the reference variable of a superclass - allows you to invoke an overridden method of a subclass having a reference to the base class.

Java determines at runtime which version of the method (superclass/subclasses) is to be executed based on the type of the object being referred, not the type of reference. It uses a mechanism known as **dynamic method dispatching**.

It relies on 2 principles: 

- a reference variable of the superclass can refer to any subtype object,
- and a superclass method can be overridden in a subclass.

```java
class MythicalAnimal {

    public void hello() {
        System.out.println("Hello, I'm an unknown animal");
    }
}

class Chimera extends MythicalAnimal {
    @Override
    public void hello() {
        System.out.println("Hello! Hello!");
    }
}

class Dragon extends MythicalAnimal {
    @Override
    public void hello() {
        System.out.println("Rrrr...");
    }
}
```

```java
//create a reference to MythicalAnimal class and assign the subclass object to it:
MythicalAnimal chimera = new Chimera();
MythicalAnimal dragon = new Dragon();
MythicalAnimal animal = new MythicalAnimal();
```

Output 

```java
chimera.hello(); // Hello! Hello!
dragon.hello(); // Rrrr...
animal.hello(); // Hello, I'm an unknown animal
```

The method call result depends on the actual type of an instance, not the reference type. The JVM calls the appropriate method for the object that is referred to in each variable.

Subtype polymorphism allows a class to specify methods that will be common to all of its subclasses and also makes it possible for subclasses to override the implementations of those methods.

**Polymorphism within a class hierarchy**

The parent class `File` represents a description of a single file in the file system. It has a subclass named `ImageFile`. It overrides the method `getFileInfo` of the parent class.

```java
class File {
    protected String fullName;

    // constructor with a single parameter    
		// getters and setters    

		public void printFileInfo() {
        String info = this.getFileInfo(); // here is polymorphic behavior!!!       
				System.out.println(info);
    }

    protected String getFileInfo() {
        return "File: " + fullName;
    }
}
```

```java
class ImageFile extends File {

    protected int width;
    protected int height;
    protected byte[] content;

    // constructor    
		// getters and setters 
   
		@Override
    protected String getFileInfo() {
        return String.format("Image: %s, width: %d, height: %d", fullName, 
															width, height);
    }
}
```

```java
//Create an instance of ImageFile and assign it to a variable of File.
File img = new ImageFile("/path/to/file/img.png", 480, 640, someBytes); // assigning an object

//call the method printFileInfo, it invokes the overridden version of the method getFileInfo.
img.printFileInfo(); // It prints "Image: /path/to/file/img.png, width: 480, height: 640"
```

### StringBuilder

Strings in Java are **immutable** = once created, a string cannot be changed. If we want to modify the content of a string object, we should create a new string. This may not be the best way when we perform a lot of modifications because each operation creates a new object, which is bad for performance.

We can create mutable string objects using a special class - `StringBuilder`. An object of this class is similar to a regular string, except that it can be modified. It is better to use `StringBuilder` than `String` where lots of concatenations are performed at runtime.

Can create an empty `StringBuilder` object or pass a string to it:

```java
StringBuilder empty = new StringBuilder();
System.out.println(empty); // ""
```

```java
StringBuilder sb = new StringBuilder("Hello!");
System.out.println(sb); // "Hello!"
```

Important methods:

- `int length()` returns the length (the character count), like in regular strings. This method does not modify the object.
- `char charAt(int index)` returns a character located at the specified index. The first character has the index 0. This method does not modify the object.
- `void setCharAt(int index, char ch)` sets a character located at the specified index to **`ch`**.
- `StringBuilder deleteCharAt(int index)` removes the character at the specified position.
- `StringBuilder append(String str)` concatenates the given string to the end of the invoking `StringBuilder` object. There are also several over-loadings to take primitive types and even arrays of characters. It is also possible to invoke this method multiple times on the same object in the same statement because this method returns the same modified object.
- `StringBuilder insert(int offset, String str)` inserts the given string into the existing `StringBuilder` object at the given position indicated by the offset.
- `StringBuilder replace(int start, int end, String str)` replaces the substring from the specified string index (inclusive) to the end index (exclusive) with a given string.
- `StringBuilder delete(int start, int end)` removes the substring from the start index (inclusive) to the end index (exclusive).
- `StringBuilder reverse()` causes this character sequence to be replaced by the reverse of the sequence `StringBuilder sb = new StringBuilder("2 * 3 + 8 * 4");` = `"4 * 8 + 3 * 2"`

when you have a `StringBuilder` object, you can get a `String` by invoking the `toString()` method.

length - returns actual number of characters

capacity - returns amount of storage available for newly inserted characters. The capacity is a part of the internal representation of `StringBuilder`, and its value will dynamically change.

```java
StringBuilder sb = new StringBuilder(); // initial capacity is 16
System.out.println(sb.length());   // 0
System.out.println(sb.capacity()); // 16
```

```java
sb.append("A very long string");

System.out.println(sb.length());   // 18
System.out.println(sb.capacity()); // 34
```

```java
StringBuilder sb = new StringBuilder(30);

System.out.println(sb.length());   // 0
System.out.println(sb.capacity()); // 30
```

### Random

**Pseudorandom numbers and seeding** - The Java random numbers aren't truly random because they can always be determined by an initial value, called **seed**.

Every time we get a new random number, we actually get the next number in a predefined sequence. These numbers are often called **pseudorandom**, and they are not completely unpredictable. We can calculate them all if we know the initial value and the algorithm of the sequence. That initial value is called a **seed**.

It is guaranteed that the same seed produces the same sequence if the same Java runtime version is used because the algorithm is the same. It is good enough for practical tasks. These generators are important because of their speed in number generation and their reproducibility.

**Creating a pseudorandom generator** - Java provides the `Random` class to generate pseudorandom values of different types, such as `int`, `long`, `double`, and even `boolean`. 

- it needs to be imported - `import java.util.Random;`

There are two constructors to create an object of this class:

- `Random()` creates a new random generator and sets the **seed** to a value that is (very likely) distinct from any other invocation of this constructor: `Random random = new Random();`
- `Random(long seed)` creates a new random generator with the specified initial value of its internal state: `Random random = new Random(100000);`

If we don't specify a seed, the generator will give us a new sequence every time. But if we specify the seed, the sequence will be calculated based on it. 

**The basic methods** - All these methods produce uniformly distributed values.

- `int nextInt()` returns a pseudorandom value of the `int` type;
- `int nextInt(int n)` returns a pseudorandom value of `int` type in the range from `0` (inclusive) to `n` (exclusive);
- `long nextLong()` returns a pseudorandom value of `long` type;
- `double nextDouble()` returns a pseudorandom value of `double` type between `0.0` and `1.0`;
- `void nextBytes(byte[] bytes)` generates random bytes and places them into a user-supplied byte array.

```java
//If we start this code multiple times, the result is different (or it may happen to be the same).
Random random = new Random();
System.out.println(random.nextInt(5)); // it may print 0, 1, 2, 3, 4
```

```java
//to reproduce the same sequence of random numbers, specify a seed to the constructor:
Random random = new Random(100000);
System.out.println(random.nextInt(5)); // it may print 0, 1, 2, 3, 4
System.out.println(random.nextInt(5)); // it may print 0, 1, 2, 3, 4
```

**Note:** an object of the `Random` class can generate Gaussian distributed pseudorandom double numbers by invoking the `nextGaussian()` method. This distribution may be required for some statistical analysis and machine learning applications, but it is not that common in general programming.

**Example - printing pseudorandom numbers**

Suppose we need a program that prints out a specified number of pseudorandom integers within a given range (boundaries included). Let’s say from 2 to 5.

- Recall - the `nextInt(int n)` method produces a pseudorandom integer from 0 to n-1.
- To get the length of the interval 2 to 5 = 4 (2 3 4 5), we use the `nextInt(4)` method - returns  0 1 2 3
- Imagine we shift the interval to the lower border value of 2 that we need.

We can implement this using `int next = random.nextInt(upper - lower + 1) + lower;` = `nextInt(4)` + 2 =  2 3 4 5

```java
import java.util.*;

public class RandomNumbersDemo {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        Scanner scanner = new Scanner(System.in);

        int lower = scanner.nextInt();
        int upper = scanner.nextInt();
        Random random = new Random();

        int intervalLength = upper - lower + 1;

        System.out.println(random.nextInt(intervalLength) + lower);
        System.out.println(random.nextInt(intervalLength) + lower);
        System.out.println(random.nextInt(intervalLength) + lower);
        System.out.println(random.nextInt(intervalLength) + lower);
    }
}
```

Input - generate numbers exactly within the range from 20 to 30 (inclusive):

`20 30`

Output example

```java
25
26
30
20
```

### Abstract Class

To have a set of fields and methods that you need to reuse in all classes within a hierarchy, you can put all the common members to a special base class and then declare subclasses which can access these members. You do not need to create objects of the base class. To achieve it, you can use an **abstract class** as the base class in the hierarchy.

An **abstract class** is a class declared with the keyword **`abstract`**. It represents an abstract concept that is used as a base class for subclasses. 

- it's impossible to create an instance of an abstract class;
- an abstract class can contain abstract methods that must be implemented in non-abstract subclasses;
- it can contain fields and non-abstract methods (including static) - static methods can't be abstract;
- an abstract class can extend another class, including an abstract one;
- it can contain a constructor.

It has two main differences from regular (concrete) classes: **no instances** and **abstract methods**.

**Abstract methods** are declared by adding the keyword **`abstract`**. They have a declaration (modifiers, a return type, and a signature) but don't have an implementation. Each concrete (non-abstract) subclass must implement these methods.

Example: 

```java
public abstract class Pet {

    protected String name;
    protected int age;

    protected Pet(String name, int age) {
        this.name = name;
        this.age = age;
    }

    public abstract void say(); // an abstract method
}
```

The class has two fields, a constructor, and an abstract method.

Since `Pet` is an abstract class we cannot create instances of this class:

```java
Pet pet = new Pet("Unnamed", 5); // this throws a compile time error
```

The method `say()` is declared abstract because, at this level of abstraction, its implementation is unknown. Concrete subclasses of the class `Pet` should have an implementation of this method.

We have two concrete subclasses of `Pet`. See they override the abstract method:

```java
class Cat extends Pet {

    // It can have additional fields as well    
		public Cat(String name, int age) {
        super(name, age);
    }

    @Override
    public void say() {
        System.out.println("Meow!");
    }
}
```

```java
class Dog extends Pet {

    // It can have additional fields as well    
		public Dog(String name, int age) {
        super(name, age);
    }

    @Override
    public void say() {
        System.out.println("Woof!");
    }
}
```

```java
Dog dog = new Dog("Boss", 5);
Cat cat = new Cat("Tiger", 2);

dog.say(); // it prints "Woof!"
cat.say(); // it prints "Meow!"
```

Recall Java doesn't support multiple inheritance for classes. Therefore, a class can extend only one abstract class.

### Throwing Exceptions

**The throw keyword** - Any object of the `Throwable` class and all its subclasses can be thrown using the **throw** statement. 

```java
public class Main {
    public static void main(String args[]) {
        RuntimeException exception = new RuntimeException("Something's bad.");
        throw exception;
    }
}
```

Here, we create an object with the specified message as the constructor argument and throw an object of the `RuntimeException` class that extends `Throwable`using `throw`. The program stops and prints the error with the message we provided:

```java
Exception in thread "main" java.lang.RuntimeException: Something's bad.
	at Main.main(Main.java:3)
```

The common practice is to create and throw an exception in a single line:

- throwing an instance of `Throwable` - `throw new Throwable("Something's bad.");`
- throwing an instance of `Exception` - `throw new Exception("An exception occurs");`
- throwing an instance of `NullPointerException` - `throw new NullPointerException("The field is null");`

It is only possible to throw an object of the `Throwable` class or a class that extends `Throwable`. For example, the line `throw new Long(10L);` does not compile.

**Throwing checked exceptions** - If a method throws a checked exception, the type of exception must be specified in the method declaration after the `throws` keyword. Otherwise, the code won't compile.

This method reads text from a file and in case the file is not found, the method throws an `IOException.` The `throws` keyword is required since an `IOException` is a checked exception.

```java
public static String readTextFromFile(String path) throws IOException {
    // find a file by the specified path        
		if (!found) {
        throw new IOException("The file " + path + " is not found");
    }
    // read and return text from the file
}
```

If a method throws 2> checked exceptions, they must be comma separated in the declaration: `public static void method() throws ExceptionType1, ExceptionType2, ExceptionType3`

If a method is declared as throwing an exception (i.e. `BaseExceptionType`), it can also throw any subclass of the specified exception (i.e. `SubClassExceptionType`): `public static void method() throws BaseExceptionType`

**Throwing unchecked exceptions** - If a method throws an unchecked exception, the keyword `throws` is not required in the method declaration (but you still have to use`throw`)

```java
class Account {

    private long balance = 0;

    public void deposit(long amount) {
        if (amount <= 0) {
            throw new IllegalArgumentException("Incorrect sum " + amount);
        }

        if (amount >= 100_000_000L) {
            throw new IllegalArgumentException("Too large amount");
        }

        balance += amount;
    }

    public long getBalance() {
        return balance;
    }
}
```

The `Account` class contains the method called `deposit`, that adds the specified amount to the current balance. If the amount is not positive or exceeds the limit, the method throws an `IllegalArgumentException`.

The `deposit` method is not declared as throwing an `IllegalArgumentException`. The same is true for all other unchecked exceptions.

When to throw an exception - The common practice is to throw an exception when and only when the method preconditions are broken, that is when it cannot be performed under the current conditions. It is recommended to throw exceptions that are most relevant (specific) to the problem: it is better to throw an object of `InvalidArgumentException` than the base `Exception` class.

Examples: Imagine a method that parses the input string in the dd-MM-yyyy format to get a month. Here, if the string is invalid, the method throws an `InvalidArgumentException`. Another example is reading a non-existing file that will lead to a `FileNotFoundException`.

How to choose between checked and unchecked exceptions? If a client can reasonably be expected to recover from an exception, make it a checked exception. If a client cannot do anything to recover, make it an unchecked exception.

### Custom Exceptions

To create a custom exception, extend the `Exception` (checked) or `RuntimeException` (unchecked) classes.

```java
public class MyAppException extends Exception {

    public MyAppException(String msg) {
        super(msg);
    }

    public MyAppException(Exception cause) {
        super(cause);
    }
}
```

This is a checked exception because it extends the `Exception` class. The declared class has two constructors for creating instances, and they call the corresponding constructor of the base class. We can throw an instance of the class:

```java
public static void someMethod() throws MyAppException {
    throw new MyAppException("Something bad");
}
```

**Best practices for custom exceptions**

1. Make sure the application will benefit from having a custom exception over a standard Java exception
2. Follow the naming convention - end class name with “Exception”
3. Provide constructor that sets a cause in case your program catches a standard exception before throwing a custom one.

```java
public class CustomException extends Exception {
   public CustomException(String message, Throwable cause) {
       super(message, cause);
   }
}
```

Is creating a custom exception a good idea? Although the custom exception feature greatly enhances the error handling mechanism, its use is not always justified. We advise you to use standard exceptions whenever possible for a number of reasons, such as:

- Standard exceptions are widely known by other programmers. One can understand the type of problem just by looking at the name of the exception.
- By opting for standard exceptions, you follow the reusability principle. It makes your code clearer and more professional.

### Enums in Java

Enum (*enumeration* ) is a special object that helps us to define/create a list of constants grouped by their content: seasons, colours, states, etc. When we store a bunch of constants in one place and handle them together**,** it helps us to avoid errors, and it makes the code look more readable and clear. It is a reference type.

It is possible to declare an Enum inside a class. In this case, we don't need to use `public` modifier in the Enum declaration.

**Defining an Enum** - create an enumeration similar to declaring classes. Constants in an Enum are written in uppercase letters and all constants should be separated with commas.

```java
public enum Season {SPRING, SUMMER, AUTUMN, WINTER}  // four instances
```

In general, an Enum can be considered as a class with predefined instances. Here, we have four instances of seasons `SPRING`, `SUMMER`, `AUTUMN` and `WINTER` inside the storage `Season`. If we want to extend the list of constants, we can simply add another instance in our Enum: mid-winter, Australian winter, etc. 

**Methods for processing Enums** - Example: Suppose that we have to write a program with an Enum that displays three possible user statuses. 

```java
//create an enum UserStatus with these statuses:
public enum UserStatus {PENDING, ACTIVE, BLOCKED}

	//initialize a variable of the type UserStatus
	UserStatus active = UserStatus.ACTIVE;

	//Each enum value has a name that can be accessed by using the method name():
	System.out.println(active.name()); // ACTIVE

	//to access an enumeration instance by its name use the valueOf() method (another way to initialize a variable) - this method is case sensitive
	UserStatus blocked = UserStatus.valueOf("BLOCKED"); // BLOCKED
	//if the given string doesn't exactly match any constant, we will get an IllegalArgumentException.
	UserStatus blocked = UserStatus.valueOf("blocked"); // IllegalArgumentException, valueOf is case-sensitive

	//to look at all constants of an enumeration, we can get them in an array by using the values() method:
	UserStatus[] statuses = UserStatus.values(); // [PENDING, ACTIVE, BLOCKED]

	//ordinal() returns the ordinal position of an instance of an enum:
	System.out.println(active.ordinal()); // 1 (starting with 0)
	System.out.println(UserStatus.BLOCKED.ordinal()); // 2

	//two variables can be correctly compared by using both the equals method and the operator ==.
	System.out.println(active.equals(UserStatus.ACTIVE)); // true
	System.out.println(active == UserStatus.ACTIVE); // true
```

**Enumerations in the switch statement** - outputs depends on the value of the variable `status`.

```java
UserStatus status = ... // some status
switch (status) {
    case PENDING:
        System.out.println("You need to wait a little.");
        break;
    case ACTIVE:
        System.out.println("No problems, you may pass here.");
        break;
    case BLOCKED:
        System.out.println("Stop! You can't pass here.");
        break;
    default:
        System.out.println("Unsupported enum constant.");
}
```

**Iterating over an Enum** - the best way to iterate over an Enum is to use a `for` or a `for-each` loop. Here we used the `values()` method to return an array of Enum values.

```java
for (UserStatus status : UserStatus.values()) {
        System.out.println(status);
    }
```

```java
/* the output is
PENDING 
ACTIVE
BLOCKED
*/
```

### Field and Methods in Enum

We use Enums to define sets of unchangeable variables. After we defined them, we may need to extend the functionality of the Enum and add values to the constants. Just like a class, an Enum can have fields, constructors and methods. An Enum comes in handy when working with values you're not going to change.

Example: write a program that displays the battery level of a smartphone, power bank, or any device with a discrete scale.

1. create an Enum with several threshold levels that represent the battery's level of charge:

```java
public enum ChargeLevel {FULL, HIGH, MEDIUM, LOW}
```

1. To display the level of battery charge visually, we divide it into several segments and have a colour indication. To do this, we add corresponding fields and values to our Enum. When we define them, we must supply values to the constructor of the Enum. We create a constructor in the `ChargeLevel` Enum and added two fields `sections` and `color`. Also, there are two methods `getSections()` and `getColor()` that return the values of fields respectively.

Note that all Enum instances are created by the JVM in the same way as a static field of a class. This is why an Enum *cannot* contain a public constructor = we *cannot* create Enum objects by invoking an Enum constructor with the `new` keyword but have to choose one of the predefined instances instead. 

Keep in mind that if your Enum contains fields and methods, you should always define them *after* the list of constants in the Enum.

```java
System.out.println(ChargeLevel.LOW.sections); // 1
System.out.println(ChargeLevel.LOW.color); // red
```

It is possible to extend an Enum by adding custom static methods. 

Inside the `findByNumberOfSections()` method, we iterate over the possible values using a `for-each` loop. 

```java
System.out.println(ChargeLevel.findByNumberOfSections(2)); // MEDIUM
```

```java
public enum ChargeLevel {

    FULL(4, "green"),
    HIGH(3, "green"),
    MEDIUM(2, "yellow"),
    LOW(1, "red");

    private final int sections;
    private final String color;

    ChargeLevel(int sections, String color) {
        this.sections = sections;
        this.color = color;
    }

    public int getSections() {
        return sections;
    }

    public String getColor() {
        return color;
    }

    public static ChargeLevel findByNumberOfSections(int sections) {
        for (ChargeLevel value: values()) {
            if (value.sections == sections) {
                return value;
            }
        }
        return null;
    }
}
```