# Java 73 - 79

### Introduction to Operating Systems

An operating system (OS) ****is a set of software that manages the communication between all other applications and hardware. For personal computers, the most popular ones are Microsoft Windows, macOS, and Linux distributions. The two top mobile operating systems are Android and iOS. Even smart kettles and fridges have their own OS.

An OS can give programs restricted access to processor units, memory, hard drives, network, peripherals, and other resources. The OS is the one that allocates all the resources the applications need to run properly - it acts as a fair referee and doesn't allow any application to use more resources than it actually needs.

Any operating system has several essential functions. Here is a list of some of them:

- Data protection and secure access;
- Resource management;
- Interaction between hardware and peripherals;
- File management;
- Running other programs.

The **kernel** is the mandatory and core part of all operating systems. Usually, it's one of the first programs that loads when you turn on your computer. It provides all the necessary means to run the programs you want. When you start an OS, you often see the Graphical User Interface ****(GUI)**.** It is the interface that allows users to interact with the device using graphical icons and audio indicators. Another way to interact with the OS is to use commands in a text-based terminal known as the Command-Line Interface ****(CLI).

There are two types of kernels: **monolithic** and **microkernels**. A ****monolithic kernel is a large program that performs most of the OS functions. At the same time, a ****microkernel performs only a small subset of the operating system functions, but we can extend it with additional modules known as **drivers**.

### Command Line overview

The **command-line interface** or **CLI** is a way to interact with an OS via text commands. The **graphical user interface** or **GUI** provides an interface with many icons and menus.

Programs executable by the CLI can be written in a command language called **shell scripts** on UNIX and UNIX-like systems such as GNU/Linux and macOS, and **batch files** on Windows.

commands: `whoami` `dir` `ls` 

### Parameters and Options

A **parameter** is some additional information that you give to the command. `mkdir papers`  , `cd /` go back to root directory

**Options**, as the name suggests, are usually optional and are used to somehow change the common behaviour of the command.

On Windows, you can change drives by adding the `/d` option to `cd` and set the path you want to follow as the parameter, for example, `F:\Codepen snippets`:

```bash
C:\users\student\Desktop> cd /d F:\Codepen snippets
F:\Codepen snippets>
```

Linux - `--help` or `man`

Windows - `help`

### Running programs on your computer

- Install JDK - check the version `java -version`
- Create a `Main.java` file using any text editor

```java
public class Main {

    public static void main(String[] args) {
        System.out.println("Hello, Java");
    }
}
```

- To compile: `javac Main.java` - The `javac` command asks the compiler to translate the source code into bytecode. The result of this command is a file named `Main.class`.
- To run: get terminal into directory of source file → `java -cp . Main`
    
    The `java` command starts a Java application. It does this by starting a JRE and invoking the main method inside the `Main` class.
    
    The `-cp` parameter (*`classpath`*) specifies the location of user-defined classes and packages. 
    
    The dot `.` means the current terminal directory. 
    

Note: you should not specify the `.class` extension when running a program.

Since Java 11, it is possible to compile and run Java source code file using a single command `java Main.java`. It will compile the file in-memory, so it does not produce a `.class` file. Many developers don't know this small but interesting feature.

### Files

**The File class** - the `File` class exists in the `java.io` package. An object of this class represents an existing or non-existing file/directory. The class can be used to manipulate files/directories: creating, removing, accessing properties and more. `File` class objects are immutable; once created, the abstract pathname represented by an object will never change.

Create a file object by passing a string path to its constructor. The valid format of the string depends on the OS:

- Windows uses backslashes for paths (`'\'`),
- Linux, OS X, Android and other UNIX-like systems use the forward slash (`'/'`).

```java
File fileOnUnix = new File("/home/username/Documents");    // a directory on a UNIX-like system
File fileOnWin = new File("D:\\Materials\\java-materials.pdf"); // a file on Windows - use the \ escape char also
```

The code will work even if a file/directory does not actually exist in your file system. It does not create a new file/directory. It just represents "a virtual" file/directory that exists already or may be created in the future.

To display the character for separating the path to a file in your case, you can print the following: `System.out.println(File.separator);` returns '/' - for Linux

**absolute path** = if it starts with the root element of the file system. It has the complete information about the file location including the type of the operating system.

**relative path** = doesn't include the root element of the file system. This always starts from your **working directory**. This directory is represented by a `.` (dot). A relative path is not complete and needs to be combined with the current directory path in order to reach the requested file.

```java
File fileOnUnix = new File("./images/picture.jpg");
File fileOnWin = new File(".\\images\\picture.jpg");
```

NOTE - the `.` can be skipped, use `..` to access parent packages

`File` instance methods

- `String getPath()` returns the string path to this file/directory;
- `String getName()` returns the name of this file/directory (just the last name of the path)
- `boolean isDirectory()` returns `true` if it is a directory and exists, otherwise, `false`;
- `boolean isFile()` returns `true` if it is a file that exists (not a directory), otherwise, `false`;
- `boolean exists()` returns `true` if this file/directory actually exists in your file system, otherwise, `false`;
- `String getParent()` returns the string path to the parent directory that contains this file or directory.

```java
File file = new File("/home/username/Documents/javamaterials.pdf");

System.out.println("File name: " + file.getName());
System.out.println("File path: " + file.getPath());
System.out.println("Is file: " + file.isFile());
System.out.println("Is directory: " + file.isDirectory());
System.out.println("Exists: " + file.exists());
System.out.println("Parent path: " + file.getParent());
```

```
File name: javamaterials.pdf
File path: /home/username/Documents/javamaterials.pdf
Is file: true
Is directory: false
Exists: true
Parent path: /home/username/Documents
```

Use `canRead()`, `canWrite()`, `canExecute()` to test whether the application can **read/modify/execute** the file denoted by the path.

### Reading Files

**Reading data using Scanner** - use `java.util.Scanner` to read data from files. It allows reading primitive types or strings by using regular expressions.

Create an instance of `java.io.File` and of `java.util.Scanner`. When you create an instance of `Scanner` passing a file, you must handle the checked exception `FileNotFoundException`. You can also declare the method as throwing this exception.

```java
File file = new File(pathToFile); //pathToFile keeps the path to a file that contains a sequence of numbers separated by spaces. 
try (Scanner scanner = new Scanner(file)) {
    while (scanner.hasNext()) { //reads each line from the file and outputs it to the standard output.
        System.out.print(scanner.nextLine() + " ");
    }
} catch (FileNotFoundException e) {
    System.out.println("No file found: " + pathToFile);
}
```

Input

```java
first line
second line
third line
```

Output

```java
first line second line third line
```

Use `nextInt`, `nextBoolean` etc for other types like integers, Boolean, doubles. In case no new data is available the `next` methods throw `java.util.NoSuchElementException`.

You should close a Scanner after use to avoid “leaks” (resource leak = type of consumption when a program doesn’t release acquired resources, usually memory leaks or handle leaks)= use a `try-with-resources` statement (try-catch)

**Reading all text from a file as a single string** - should only be used for small text files with size smaller than RAM available to JVM.

```java
import java.io.IOException;
import java.nio.file.Files; //The Files class consists of methods that operate on files
import java.nio.file.Paths; //The Paths class contains a set of methods that return a special object to represent the path to a file.

public class ReadingFileDemo { 
    public static String readFileAsString(String fileName) throws IOException { //returns all text from a specified file:
        return new String(Files.readAllBytes(Paths.get(fileName)));
    }

    public static void main(String[] args) {
        String pathToHelloWorldJava = "/home/username/Projects/hello-world/HelloWorld.java";
        try {
            System.out.println(readFileAsString(pathToHelloWorldJava)); //read the source code from the file HelloWorld.java and print it to the standard output.
        } catch (IOException e) {
            System.out.println("Cannot read file: " + e.getMessage());
        }
    }
}
```

### What is a bug?

A **software bug** is a problem that causes a program to crash or produce invalid output.

A program is called **stable** if it doesn't have a lot of obvious bugs. If there is a large number of bugs that affect functionality and cause incorrect results, it is considered **buggy** or **unstable**.

Avoid bugs:

1. **Make sure you know what to do**: you need to understand the requirements of a program that you are going to work on.
2. **Decompose a program** into small units that are easy to look through and understand. A good architecture reduces software complexity, and, as a consequence, the number of errors.
3. **Write easy-to-read-code** and follow all the standards of the language. It will also allow you to make fewer errors.
4. **Run the program** with boundary input values. Do not forget to consider different cases: 0 or a huge number as an input value, 0 or 1 element as an input sequence.
5. **Write automated tests** that will check the program at the build time.